\documentclass[../sparc.tex]{subfiles}
\graphicspath{{\subfix{../images/}}}
\begin{document}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\section{Serial port}
\label{section:communication-serial-port}
\index{Electronics!Serial port}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\subsection{General information}

\emph{Serial port} is one of the simplest ways of communication between digital
devices.  As it follows from its name the protocol transfers bits sequentially,
one bit at the time.  There are other hardware interfaces that also use serial
data transfer -- for example, USB and Ethernet.  But under the term ``serial
port'' most people mean the hardware that is compatible with the RS-232 and
other related standards (e.g. RS-485, RS-422 and others.)

A serial port usually implements the \emph{full-duplex} communication as it
allows to transfer data in both directions simultaneously.  For that two
independent lines are used: one for transferring the data (``Transmit'' or
``Tx'') and another for receiving the data (``Receive'' or ``Rx''.)

We may wonder why usually ``Receive'' is shortened to ``Rx'' and ``Transmit'' to
``Tx''. The reason for that can be found in the history: back in the times when
telegraph was in use it was easier to send a letter than to send a dot, thus
operators used ``x'' letter in the place of a dot.

The cost of telegraph usage was fixed and it included the salary of an operator,
the cost of printer usage and the cost of the telegraph line between the
stations.  The more data you could transfer, the more money you could earn.
That lead to the shear number of shorthands for the common words, especially
long ones.  Thus instead of the long word ``Transmission'' telegraph operators
preferred to use just ``T.'' (knowing that on the receiving site they will be
understood.)  But the dot symbol wasn't available in telegraph when the letter
input mode was active.  That forced operators to input ``T'' letter, then switch
telegraph to the numbers input mode (to input a dot symbol) and then switch back
to the letter input mode.  That took a long time.  Thus each time when it was
needed to send a dot, telegraphers used ``X'' symbol instead, that could be
written without switching to the number input mode.  Because very small number
of English words end with ``X'' this symbol turned out to be an ideal
replacement for a dot.

That the origin of such shorthands as ``Rx'' and ``Tx''.\autocite{so:krisw}

\end{document}
