\documentclass[../sparc.tex]{subfiles}
\graphicspath{{\subfix{../images/}}}
\begin{document}

\newglossaryentry{UART}{name=UART, description={Universal Asynchronous
    Receiver-Transmitter}}

So now finally time has come for us to talk about the communication between a
micro-controller and external devices, and the language that is used for that.
``Sure!'' -- we can exclaim, -- ``The language of communication between machines
are the ones and zeroes, the machine code!''  And we will be right, the
communication between machines usually boils down to the transferring of ones
and zeroes.  But aside from this ``alphabet'' there are other important terms
such as the \emph{transmission medium} and the \emph{transmission protocol}.

Very often the transmission medium is represented by one of the three mediums: a
wire (like in case of USB cable), radio (Wi-Fi, Bluetooth) or the light (fiber
optic.)  Computers can even use sound waves as the means of communication but
that's more like an exception.

A transmission protocol sets the data transferring format itself -- where the
beginning and the end of a ``sentence'' and what is considered as ``words''
during the communication.  One of the well-known protocol examples is USB.

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\section{Classification of data transferring methods}

\newglossaryentry{LPT}{name=LPT, description={Line Print Terminal}}

Data transferring between devices can be divided into two big categories:

\begin{itemize}
\item \textbf{Parallel data transferring} -- all the bits of a message are
  transferred simultaneously (in parallel manner.)  For that the devices must be
  connected with a bus that has the same number of lines as the number of bits
  in the message.
\item \textbf{Serial data transferring} -- bits are transferred one after
  another, using time encoding.  For that even one data line (one wire) is
  enough.  But in fact most of serial data transferring methods use two or more
  lines.
\end{itemize}

\figureProtocolClassification{en}

One of the examples of parallel data transferring is \emph{parallel port}.
Usually in the computer world it is associated with Line Print Terminal
interface (\gls{LPT}.)  Back in the period between 1970-2000 such ports were
used for connecting printers to computers and were very popular.  In the modern
world LPT ports almost pushed out of use as they are replaced with such
interfaces as USB.

One of the advantages of a parallel port (as follows from its name) is the
ability to transfer several bits of information simultaneously, which speeds up
the data transferring.  For example, in LPT ports eight lines are used for the
data transfer (aside from the auxiliary lines such as the power supply, common
ground and the clock signal), thus allowing us to transfer 8 bits (1 byte) of
information in one clock tick.  Also we can consider the simplicity of the
implementation as one of the advantages of the parallel port as well.
Nevertheless it has an important (and usually critical) drawback: the interface
between devices is very clumsy as it requires many wires.  That's why we will
discuss in details only serial data transferring interfaces: \gls{UART} and I2C.

%% TODO: Add SPI.

\end{document}
